



Produced by David Widger





              THE DORE GALLERY OF BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS

                  Illustrated by Gustave Dore

                          Volume 7.




JESUS WALKING ON THE WATER.


And when he had sent them away, he departed into a mountain to pray. And
when, even was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone
on the land. And he saw them toiling in rowing; for the wind was contrary
unto them: and about the fourths watch of the night he cometh unto them,
walking upon the sea, and would have passed: by them. But when they saw
him walking upon the sea, they supposed it had been a spirit, and cried
out: for they all saw him, and were troubled. And immediately he talked
with them, and saith unto them, Be of good cheer: it is I; be not afraid.

And he went up unto them into the ship; and the wind ceased: and they
were sore amazed in themselves beyond measure, and wondered. For they
considered not the miracle of the loaves; for their heart was
hardened.--Mark vi, 46-52.




CHRIST'S ENTRY INTO JERUSALEM.


And when they drew nigh unto Jerusalem, and were come to Bethphage, unto
the mount of Olives, then sent Jesus two disciples, saying unto them, Go
into the village over against you, and straightway ye shall find an ass
tied, and a colt with her: loose them, and bring the unto me. And if any
man say ought unto you, ye shall say, The Lord hath need of them; and
straightway he will send them.

All this was done that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the
prophet, saying, Tell ye the daughter of Sion, Behold, thy King cometh
unto thee, meek, and sitting upon an ass'; and a colt the foal of an ass.

And the disciples went, and did as Jesus commanded them, and brought the
ass, and the colt, and put on them their clothes, and they set him
thereon.

And a very great multitude spread their garments in the way; others cut
down branches; from the trees, and strewed them in the way. And the
multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to
the son of David: Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord;
Hosanna in the highest.

And when he was come into Jerusalem, all the city was moved, saying, Who
is this? And the multitude said, This is Jesus the prophet of Nazareth of
Galilee.--Matthew xxi, I-II.




JESUS AND THE TRIBUTE MONEY.


And they send unto him certain of the Pharisees and of the Herodians, to
catch him in his words.

And when they were come, they say unto him, Master, we know that thou art
true, and carest for no man: for thou regardest not the person of men,
but teachest the way of God in truth: Is it lawful to give tribute to
Caesar, or not? Shall we give, or shall we not give?

But he, knowing their hypocrisy, said unto them, Why tempt ye me? bring
me a penny, that I may see it. And they brought it.

And he saith unto them, Whose is this image and superscription? And they
said unto him, Caesar's.

And Jesus answering said unto them, Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's.

And they marveled at him.--Mark xii, 13-17.




THE WIDOW'S MITE.


And Jesus sat over against the treasury, and beheld how the people cast
money into the treasury: and many that were rich cast in much.

And there came a certain poor widow, and she threw in two mites, which
make a farthing. And he called unto him his disciples, and saith unto
them, Verily I say unto you, That this poor widow hath cast more in, than
all they which have cast into the treasury: for all they did cast in of
their abundance; but she of her want did cast in all that she had, even
all her living.--Mark xii, 13-17




RAISING OF THE DAUGHTER OF JAIRUS.


And, behold, there cometh one of the rulers of the synagogue, Jairus by
name; and when he saw him, he fell at his feet, and besought him greatly,
saying, My little daughter lieth at the point of death: I pray thee, come
and lay thy hands on her, that she may be healed and she shall live. And
Jesus went with him; and much people followed him, and thronged him.

And a certain woman which had an issue of blood twelve years, and had
suffered many things of many physicians, and had spent all that she had,
and was nothing bettered, but rather grew, worse, when she had heard of
Jesus, came in the press behind, and touched his garment. For she said,
If I may touch but his clothes, I shall be whole. And straightway the
fountain of her blood was dried up; and she felt in her body that she was
healed of that plague. And Jesus, immediately knowing in himself that
virtue had gone out of him, turned him about in the press, and said, Who
touched my clothes? And his disciples said unto him, Thou seest the
multitude thronging thee, and sayest thou, Who touched me? And he looked
round about to see her that had done this thing. But the woman fearing
and trembling, knowing what was done in her, came and fell down before
him, and told him all the truth. And he said unto her Daughter, thy faith
hath made the whole; go in peace, and be whole of thy plague.

While he yet spake, there came from the ruler of the synagogue's house
certain which said, Thy daughter is dead: why troublest thou the Master
any further? As soon as Jesus heard the word that was spoken, he saith
unto the ruler of the synagogue, Be not afraid, only believe. And he
suffered no man to follow him, save Peter, and James, and John the
brother of James. And he cometh to the house of the ruler of the
synagogue, and seeth the tumult, and them that wept and wailed greatly.
And when he was come in, he saith unto them, Why make ye this ado, and
weep? the damsel is not dead, but sleepeth. And they laughed him to
scorn. But when he had put them all out, he taketh the father and the
mother of the damsel, and them that were with him, and entereth in where
the damsel was lying. And he took the damsel by the hand, and said unto
her, Talitha cumi; which is, being interpreted, Damsel, I say unto thee,
arise. And straightway the damsel arose, and walked; for she was of the
age of twelve years. And they were astonished with a great astonishment.

And he charged them straitly that no man should know it; and commanded
that something should be given her to eat.--Mark v, 22-43.




THE GOOD SAMARITAN.


But he, willing to justify himself, said unto Jesus, And who is my
neighbor?

And Jesus answering said, A certain man went down from Jerusalem to
Jericho, and fell among thieves, which stripped him of his raiment, and
wounded him, and departed, leaving him half dead. And by chance there
came down a certain priest that way: and when he saw him, he passed by on
the other side. And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came and
looked on him, and passed by on the other side. But a certain Samaritan,
as he journeyed, came where he was: and when he saw him, he had
compassion on him. And went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in
oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn,
and took care of him. And on the morrow when he departed, he took out two
pence, and gave them to the host, and said unto him, Take care of him;
and whatsoever thou spendest more, when I come again, I will repay thee.
Which now of these three, thinkest thou, was neighbor unto him that fell
among the thieves?

And he said, He that shewed mercy on him.

Then said Jesus unto him, Go, and do thou likewise.--Luke x, 29-37.




ARRIVAL OF THE SAMARITAN AT THE INN.


But a certain Samaritan, as he journeyed, came where he was; and when he
saw him, he had compassion on him, and went to him, and bound up his
wounds, pouring in oil and wine, and set him on his own beast, and
brought him to an inn, and took care of him. Luke x, 33-34




THE PRODIGAL SON.


Likewise, I say unto you, there is joy in the presence of the angels of
God over one sinner that repenteth.

And he said, a certain man had two sons: and the younger of them said to
his father, Father, give me the portion of goods that falleth to me. And
he divided unto them his living.

And not many days after the younger son gathered all together, and took
his journey into a far country, and there wasted his substance with
riotous living. And when he had spent all, there arose a mighty famine in
that land; and he began to be in want. And he went and joined himself to
a citizen of that country; and he sent him into his fields to feed swine.
And he would fain have filled his belly with the husks that the swine did
eat: and no man gave unto him.

And when he came to himself, he said, How many hired servants of my
father's have bread enough and to spare, and I perish with hunger! I will
arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son: make me as one of thy hired servants.

And he arose, and came to his father. But when he was yet a great way
off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his
neck, and kissed him. And the son said unto him, Father, I have sinned
against heaven, and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy
son. But the father said to his servants, Bring forth the best robe, and
put it on him; and put a ring on his hand, and shoes on his feet: And
bring hither the fatted calf, and kill it; and let us eat, and be merry:
for this my son was dead, and is alive again; he was lost, and is found.
And they began to be merry.

Now his elder son was in the field: and as he came and drew nigh to the
house, he heard music and dancing. And he called one of the servants, and
asked what these things meant.

And he said unto him, thy brother is come; and thy father hath killed the
fatted calf, because he hath received him safe and sound.

And he was angry, and would not go in: therefore came his father out, and
intreated him. And he answering said to his father, Lo, these many years
do I serve thee, neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment: and
yet thou never gavest me a kid, that I might make merry with my friends:
but as soon as this thy son was come, which hath devoured thy living with
harlots, thou hast killed for him the fatted calf.

And he said unto him, Son, thou art ever with me, and all that I have is
thine. It was meet that we should make merry, and be glad: for this thy
brother was dead, and is alive again; and was lost, and is found.--Luke
xv, 10-32




LAZARUS AND THE RICH MAN.


There was a certain rich man, which was clothed in purple and fine linen,
and fared sumptuously every day:

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus, which was laid at his gate,
full of sores, and desiring to be fed with the crumbs which fell from the
rich man's table: moreover the dogs came and licked his sores.

And it came to pass, that the beggar died, and was carried by the angels
into Abraham's bosom: the rich man also died, and was buried; and in hell
he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and seeth Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy
on me, and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water
and cool my tongue; for I am tormented in this flame.

But Abraham said, Son, remember that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy
good things, and likewise Lazarus evil things: but now he is comforted,
and thou art tormented. And beside all this, between us and you there is
a great gulf fixed: so that they which would pass from hence to you
cannot; neither can they pass to us, that would come from thence.

Then he said, I pray thee therefore, father, that thou wouldest send him
to my father's house: for I have five brethren; that he may testify unto
them, lest they also come into this place of torment.

Abraham saith unto him, They have Moses and the prophets; let them hear
them.

And he said, Nay, father Abraham: but if one went unto them from the
dead, they will repent.

And he said unto him, If they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither
will they be persuaded though one rose from the dead.--Luke xvi, 19-31




THE PHARISEE AND THE PUBLICAN.


And he spake this parable unto certain which trusted in themselves that
they were righteous, and despised others.

Two men went up into the temple to pray; the one a Pharisee, and the
other a publican; The Pharisee stood and prayed thus with himself, God, I
thank thee, that I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this publican. I fast twice in the week, I give
tithes of all that I possess. And the publican, standing afar off, would
not lift up as much as his eyes unto heaven, but smote upon his breast,
saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. I tell you, this man went down to
his house justified rather than the other: for every: one that exalteth
himself shall be abased; and he that humbleth himself shall be exalted.
Luke xviii, 9-14.




JESUS AND THE WOMAN OF SAMARIA.


Then cometh he to a city of Samaria, which is called Sychar, near to the
parcel of ground that Jacob gave to his son Joseph. Now Jacob's well was
there. Jesus therefore, being wearied with his journey, sat thus on the
well: and it was about the sixth hour. There cometh a woman of Samaria to
draw water: Jesus saith unto her, Give me to drink.

(For his disciples were gone away unto the city to buy meat.)

Then saith the woman of Samaria unto him, How is it that thou, being a
Jew, askest drink of me, which am a woman of Samaria? for the Jews have
no dealings with the Samaritans.

Jesus answered and said unto her, If thou knewest the gift of God, and
who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink; thou wouldest have asked
of him, and he would have given thee living water.

The woman saith unto him, Sir, thou hast nothing to draw with, and the
well is deep from whence then hast thou that living water? Art thou
greater than our father Jacob, which gave us the well, and drank thereof
himself, and his children, and his cattle?

Jesus answered and said unto her, Whosoever drinketh of this water shall
thirst again but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him
shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a
well of water springing up into everlasting life.

The woman saith unto him, Sir, give me this water, that I thirst not,
neither come hither to draw.

Jesus saith unto her, Go, call thy husband, and come hither. The woman
answered and said, I have no husband.

Jesus said unto her, Thou hast well said, I have no husband: for thou
hast had five husbands; and he whom thou now hast is not thy husband: in
that saidst thou truly.

The woman saith unto him, Sir, I perceive that thou art a prophet. Our
fathers worshiped in this mountain; and ye say, that in Jerusalem is the
place where men ought to worship.

Jesus saith unto her, Woman, believe me, the hour cometh, when ye shall
neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father. Ye
worship ye know not what: we know what we worship; for salvation is of
the Jews. But the hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshipers shall
worship the Father in spirit and in truth: for the Father seeketh such to
worship him. God is a Spirit: and they that worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth.

The woman saith unto him, I know that Messias cometh, which is called
Christ: when he is come, he will tell us all things.

Jesus saith unto her, I that speak unto thee am he.

And upon this came his disciples, and marveled that he talked with the
woman: yet no man said, What seekest thou? or, Why talkest thou with her?

The woman then left her waterpot, and went her way into the city, and
saith to the men, Come, see a man, which told me all things, that ever I
did: is not this the Christ? Then they went out of the city, and came
unto him.--John iv 5-30





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible
Illustrations, Volume 7, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

*** 