



Produced by David Widger





              THE DORE GALLERY OF BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS

                  Illustrated by Gustave Dore

                          Volume 8.



JESUS AND THE WOMAN TAKEN IN ADULTERY.


Jesus went unto the mount of Olives. And early in the morning he came
again into the temple, and all the people came unto him; and he sat down,
and taught them.

And the scribes and Pharisees brought unto him a woman taken in adultery;
and when they had set her in the midst, they say unto him, Master, this
woman was taken in adultery, in the very act. Now Moses in the law
commanded us, that such should be stoned: but what sayest thou? This they
said, tempting him, that they might have to accuse him.

But Jesus stooped down, and with his finger wrote on the ground, as
though he heard them not.

So when they continued asking him, he lifted up himself, and said unto
them, He that is without sin among you, let him first cast a stone at
her.

And again he stooped down, and wrote on the ground.

And they which heard it, being convicted by their own conscience, went
out one by one, beginning at the eldest, even unto the last; and Jesus
was left alone, and the woman standing in the midst. When Jesus had
lifted up himself, and saw none but the woman, he said unto her, Woman
where are those thine accusers? Hath no man condemned thee? She said, No
man, Lord.

And Jesus said unto her, Neither do I condemn thee: go, and sin no more.
--john viii, 1-11




THE RESURRECTION OF LAZARUS.


Now Jesus was not yet come into the town, but was in that place where
Martha met him. The Jews then which were with her in the house, and
comforted her, when they saw Mary, that she rose up hastily and went out,
followed her, saying, She goeth unto the grave to weep there. Then when
Mary was come where Jesus was, and saw him, she fell down at his feet,
saying unto him, Lord, if thou hadst been here, my brother had not died.

When Jesus therefore saw her weeping, and the Jews also weeping which
came with her, he groaned in the spirit, and was troubled, and said,
Where have ye laid him?

They said unto him, Lord, come and see.

Jesus wept.

Then said the Jews, Behold how he loved him! And some of them said, Could
not this man, which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even
this man should not have died?

Jesus therefore again groaning in himself cometh to the grave. It was a
cave and a stone lay upon it. Jesus said, Take ye away the stone.

Martha, the sister of him that was dead, saith unto him, Lord, by this
time he stinketh for he hath been dead four days.

Jesus saith unto her, Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest
believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?

Then they took away the stone from the place where the dead was laid.

And Jesus lifted up his eyes, and said, Father, I thank thee that thou
hast heard me. And I knew that thou hearest me always: but because of the
people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast
sent me.

And when he thus had spoken, he cried with a loud voice, Lazarus, come
forth.

And he that was dead came forth, bound hand and foot with graveclothes:
and his face was bound about with a napkin.

Jesus saith unto them, Loose him, and let him go.

Then many of the Jews which came to Mary, and had seen the things which
Jesus did, believed on him.--John xi, 30-45




MARY MAGDALENE.


Of Mary "called Magdalene" (Luke viii, 2) but few particulars are
recorded in scripture. We first hear of her as having been delivered by
Jesus of seven devils (Luke viii, 1-3; Mark xvi, 9). Impelled, no doubt,
by gratitude for her deliverance, she becomes one of his followers,
accompanying him thenceforward in all his wanderings faithfully till his
death. She was the first person to whom he appeared after his
resurrection (Mark xvi, 9; John xx, 1, 11-18) The common belief that she
was a fallen woman is destitute of the slightest foundation. On the
contrary, the references to her as being in the company of such women as
Joanna, the wife of Herod's steward, Salome, the mother of James and
John, and Mary, the mother of Jesus (Luke viii, 3; Mark xvi, 40; John
xix, 25), strongly discountenance such a supposition. The error, which
had no other source than ecclesiastical tradition, has been fostered and
perpetuated by the stupid blunder of the translators of the authorized
version in identifying her with the "sinner" who is described in Luke
vii, 37-50 as washing the feet of Jesus with her tears (see head-note to
Luke vii).

The Roman Catholic notion that this "sinner" was Mary the sister of
Lazarus is almost equally groundless (see Douay Bible, head-note to
Matthew xxvi, and the foot-note references to Luke vii, 37, found in most
Catholic Bibles). The only reason for this identification is that the
anointing by the "sinner" is described as taking place in the house of a
Pharisee named Simon (Luke vii, 36, 39-40 43-44); that the anointing by
the unnamed woman, as described in Matthew xxvi, 6-13 and Mark xiv, 3-9,
took place in the house of one "Simon the leper," in Bethany; and that
Mary, the sister of Lazarus, is described in John xi, 2, and xii, 3-8, as
anointing Jesus in a house (apparently that of Lazarus himself) in
Bethany, when a conversation ensues altogether different from that
recorded in Luke vii, but similar to that related in Matthew xxvi, and
Mark xiv, save that the objection to the anointing of Jesus is made, not
by "his disciples" (Matthew xxvi, 8), not by "some that had indignation"
(Mark xiv, 4), but by "one of his disciples, Judas Iscariot, Simon's son"
(John xii, 4). The demeanor of Mary, the sister of Lazarus, is, however,
by no means that of a fallen and sinful though penitent woman but that of
a pious and good one (see Luke x, 39, 42; John xi, 28-33; xii, 3).

Dore's illustration, which portrays Mary Magdalene as a heartbroken and
despairing sinner, shows that he has fallen into the common error.




THE LAST SUPPER.


Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread the disciples came to
Jesus, saying unto him, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat
the passover? And he said, Go into the city to such a man, and say unto
him, The Master saith, My time is at hand; I will keep the passover at
thy house with my disciples. And the disciples did as Jesus had appointed
them; and they made ready the passover.

Now when the even was come, he sat down with the twelve. And as they did
eat, he said, Verily I say unto you, that one of you shall betray me.

And they were exceeding sorrowful, and began every one of them to say
unto him, Lord, is it I?

And he answered and said, He that dippeth his hand with me in the dish,
the same shall betray me. The Son of man goeth as it is written of him:
but woe unto that man by whom the Son of man is betrayed! it had been
good for that man if he had not been born. Then Judas, which betrayed
him, answered and said, Master, is it I? He said unto him, Thou hast
said.

And as they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it,
and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat; this is my body. And
he took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, Drink ye
all of it; for this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for
many for the remission of sins. But I say unto you, I will not drink
henceforth of this fruit of the vine, until that day when I drink it new
with you in my Father's kingdom.

And when they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of
Olives.--Matthew xxvi, 17-30.




THE AGONY IN THE GARDEN.


And he came out, and went, as he was wont, to the mount of Olives; and
his disciples all followed him. And when he was at the place, he said
unto them, Pray that ye enter not in temptation.

And he was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast, and kneeled down,
and prayed Saying, Father, if thou be willing, remove this cup from me:
nevertheless not my will, but thine, be done.

And there appeared an angel unto him from heaven, strengthening him.

And being in an agony he prayed more earnestly: and his sweat was as it
were great drops, of blood falling down to the ground.

And when he rose up from prayer, and was come to his disciples, he found
them sleeping for sorrow, and said unto them, Why sleep ye? rise and
pray, lest ye enter into temptation--Luke xxii, 39-46.




PRAYER OF, JESUS IN THE GARDEN OF' OLIVES.


Then cometh Jesus with them unto a place called Gethsemane, and saith
unto, the disciples, Sit ye here, while I go and pray yonder. And he took
with him Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and began to be sorrowful and
very heavy. Then saith he unto them, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even
unto death: tarry ye here, and watch with me.

And he went a little farther, and fell on his face, and prayed, saying, O
my Father, if be possible, let this cup pass from me: nevertheless not as
I will, but as thou wilt.

And he cometh unto the disciples, and findeth them asleep, and saith unto
Peter, What, could ye not watch with me one hour? Watch and pray, that ye
enter not into temptation the spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is
weak.

He went away again the second time, and prayed, saying, O my Father, if
this cup may not pass away from me, except I drink it, thy will be done.

And he came and found them asleep again: for their eyes were heavy.

And he left them, and went away again, and prayed the third time, saying
the same words.

Then cometh he to his disciples, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and
take your rest behold, the hour is at hand, and the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise let us be going: behold, he is
at hand that doth betray me. Matthew xxvi, 36-46




THE BETRAYAL.


And he cometh the third time, and saith unto them, Sleep on now, and take
your rest it is enough, the hour is come; behold, the Son of man is
betrayed into the hands of sinners. Rise up, let us go; lo, he that
betrayeth me is at hand.

And immediately, while he yet spake, cometh Judas, one of the twelve, and
with him great multitude with swords and staves, from the chief priests
and the scribes and the elders. And he that betrayed him had given them a
token, saying, Whomsoever I shall kiss, that same is he; take him, and
lead him away safely. And as soon as he was come, he goeth straight way
to him, and saith, Master, master; and kissed him.

And they laid their hands on him, and took him. And one of them that
stood by drew a sword, and smote a servant of the high priest, and cut
off his ear. And Jesus answered and said unto them, Are ye come out, as
against a thief, with swords and with staves to take me? I was daily with
you in the temple teaching, and ye took me not but the scriptures must be
fulfilled.

And they all forsook him, and fled.--Mark xiv, 41-50




CHRIST FAINTING UNDER THE CROSS.


The incident depicted in this illustration seems to be as apocryphal as
that embodied in the artist's picture of Mary Magdalene. There is
absolutely no warrant in scripture for the notion that Christ fainted
under the burden of the cross. The only foundation for such an idea to
found in the Bible is contained in the head note to Mark xv, which is
quite unwarranted by the text. According to the three synoptic gospels
the cross was borne not by Christ, but by Simon, a Cyrenian (see Matthew
xxvii, 32; Mark xv, 2 1; Luke xxiii, 26). According to the fourth
evangelist, Jesus bore the cross without assistance the whole distance to
the place crucifixion (John xix, 16-18). In not one of the four
narratives is there so much as a hint that he fainted under the burden.




THE FLAGELLATION.


Then released he Barabbas unto them: and when he had scourged Jesus, he
deliver him to be crucified.--Matthew xxvii, 26.

And so Pilate, willing to content the people, released Barabbas unto
them, and deliver Jesus, when he had scourged him, to be crucified.--Mark
xv, 15.

Then Pilate therefore took Jesus, and scourged him. John xix.




THE CRUCIFIXION.


And when they were come unto a place called Golgotha, that is to say, a
place of a skull they gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall: and
when he had tasted thereof, he would not drink. And they crucified him,
and parted his garments, casting lots: that it might be fulfilled which
was spoken by the prophet, They parted my garments among them, and upon
my vesture did they cast lots. And sitting down they watched him there;
and set up over his head his accusation written, THIS IS JESUS THE KING
OF THE JEWS.

Then were there two thieves crucified with him, one on the right hand,
and another on the left.

And they that passed by reviled him, wagging their heads, and saying,
Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days, save
thyself. If thou be the Son of God come down from the cross.

Likewise also the chief priests mocking him, with the scribes and elders,
said, He saved others: himself he cannot save. If he be the King of
Israel, let him now come down from the cross, and we will believe him. He
trusted in God; let him deliver him now, if he will have him: for he
said, I am the Son of God.

The thieves also, which were crucified with him, cast the same in his
teeth.--Matthew xxvii, 33--44.




CLOSE OF THE CRUCIFIXION.


Now from the sixth hour there was darkness over all the land unto the
ninth hour. And about the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice,
saying, Eli, Eli, lama sabachthani? that is to say, My God, my God, why
hast thou forsaken me?

Some of them that stood there, when they heard that, said, This man
calleth for Elias. And straightway one of them ran, and took a sponge,
and filled it with vinegar, and put it on a reed, and gave him to drink.
The rest said, Let be, let us see whether Elias will come to save him.

Jesus, when he had cried again with a loud voice, yielded up the ghost.

And, behold, the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the
bottom; and the earth did quake, and the rocks rent; and the graves were
opened; and many bodies of the saints which slept arose, and came out of
the graves after his resurrection, and went into the holy city, and
appeared unto many.

Now when the centurion, and they that were with him, watching Jesus, saw
the earthquake, and those things that were done, they feared greatly,
saying, Truly this was the Son of God.

And many women were there beholding afar off, which followed Jesus from
Galilee, ministering unto him: among which was Mary Magdalene, and Mary
the mother of James and Joses, and the mother of Zebedee's
children.--Matthew xxvii, 45-56.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible
Illustrations, Volume 8, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

*** 