



Produced by David Widger





              THE DORE GALLERY OF BIBLE ILLUSTRATIONS

                  Illustrated by Gustave Dore

                          Volume 9.



THE BURIAL OF JESUS.


When the even was come, there came a rich man of Arimathea, named Joseph,
who also himself was Jesus' disciple he went to Pilate, and begged the
body of Jesus. Then Pilate commanded the body to be delivered. And when
Joseph had taken the body, he wrapped it in a clean linen cloth, and laid
it in his own new tomb, which he had hewn out in the rock: and he rolled
a great stone to the door of the sepulchre, and departed.

And there was Mary Magdalene, and the other Mary, sitting over against
the sepulchre.--Matthew xxvii, 57-61




THE ANGEL AT THE SEPULCHRE.


In the end of the sabbath, as it began to dawn toward the first day of
the week, came Mary Magdalene and the other Mary to see the sepulchre.

And, behold, there was a great earthquake: for the angel of the Lord
descended from, heaven, and came and rolled back the stone from the door,
and sat upon it. His countenance was like lightning, and his raiment
white as snow: and for fear of him the keepers did shake, and became as
dead men.

And the angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye: for I know
that ye seek Jesus, which was crucified. He is not here: for he is risen,
as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay. And go quickly, and
tell his disciples that he is risen from the dead and, behold, he goeth
before you into Galilee; there shall ye see him: lo, I have told you.

And they departed quickly from the sepulchre with fear and great joy; and
did run to bring his disciples word.--Matthew xxviii, 1-8.




THE JOURNEY TO EMMAUS.


And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus
which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs.

And they talked together of all these things which had happened. And it
came to pass that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus
himself drew near and went with them. But their eyes were holden that
they should not know him.

And he said unto them, What manner of communications are these that ye
have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?

And the one of them, whose, name was Cleopas, answering said unto him,
Art thou only a stranger in Jerusalem, and hast not known the things
which are come to pass there in these days?

And he said unto them, What things?

And they said unto him, Concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which was a prophet
mighty in deed and word before God and all the people: And how the chief
priests and our rulers delivered him to be condemned to death, and have
crucified him. But we trusted that it had been he which should have
redeemed Israel: and beside all this, to-day is the third day since these
things were done. Yea, and certain women also of our company made us
astonished, which were early at the sepulchre; and when they found not
his body, they came, saying, that they had also seen a vision of angels,
which said that he was alive. And certain of them which were with us went
to the sepulchre, and found it even so as the women had said: but him
they saw not.

Then he said unto them, O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that
the prophets have spoken: ought not Christ to have suffered these things,
and to enter into his glory?

And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in
all the scriptures the things concerning himself.

And they drew nigh unto the village, whither they went: and he made as
though he would have gone further. But they constrained him, saying,
Abide with us: for it is toward evening, and the day is far spent. And he
went in to tarry with them.

And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gave to them. And their eyes were opened, and
they knew him; and he vanished out of their sight.

And they said one to another, Did not our heart burn within us, while he
talked with us by the way, and while he opened to us the scriptures?

And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, saying, The Lord
is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon.

And they told what things were done in the way, and how he was known of
them in breaking of bread.--Luke xxiv, 13-35.




THE ASCENSION.


Now upon the first day of the week, very early in the morning, they came
unto the sepulchre, bringing the spices which they had prepared, and
certain others with them. And they found the stone rolled away from the
sepulchre. * * *

And they remembered his words. And returned from the sepulchre, and told
all these things unto the eleven, and to all the rest. * * *

And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called Emmaus,
which was from Jerusalem about threescore furlongs. And they talked
together of all these things which had happened. * * *

And they rose up the same hour, and returned to Jerusalem, and found the
eleven gathered together, and them that were with them, saying, The Lord
is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon. And they told what things
were done in the way, and how he was known of them in breaking of bread.
And as they thus spake, Jesus himself stood in the midst of them, and
saith unto them, Peace be unto you. * * *

And, behold, I send the promise of my Father upon you: but tarry ye in
the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high.

And he led them out as far as to Bethany, and he lifted up his hands, and
blessed them. And it came to pass, while he blessed them, he was parted
from them, and carried up into heaven. And they worshiped him, and
returned to Jerusalem with great joy. Luke xxiv, 1-2, 8-9, 13-14, 33-36,
49-52.

The former treatise have I made, O Theophilus, of all that Jesus began
both to do and teach, until the day in which he was taken up, after that
he through the Holy Ghost had given commandments unto the apostles whom
he had chosen: to whom also he shewed himself alive after his passion by
many infallible proofs, being seen of them forty days, and speaking of
the things pertaining to the kingdom of God: and, being assembled
together with them, commanded them that they should not depart from
Jerusalem, but, wait for the promise of the Father, which, saith he, ye
have heard of me. For John truly baptized with water; but ye shall be
baptized with the Holy Ghost not many days hence.

When they therefore were come together, they asked of him, saying, Lord,
wilt thou at this time restore again the kingdom of Israel? And he said
unto them, It is not for you to know the times or the seasons, which the
Father hath put in his own power. But ye shall receive power, after that
the Holy Ghost is come upon you: and ye shall be witnesses unto me both
in Jerusalem, and all Judaea, and in Samaria, and unto the uttermost part
of the earth.

And when he had spoken these things, while they beheld, he was taken up:
and a cloud received him out of their sight. And while they looked
steadfastly toward heaven as he went up, behold, two men stood by them in
white apparel.--Acts i, 1-10




THE MARTYRDOM OF ST. STEPHEN.


And Stephen, full of faith and power, did great wonders and miracles
among the people.

Then there arose certain of the synagogue, which is called the synagogue
of the Libertines, and Cyrenians, and Alexandrians, and of them of
Cilicia and of Asia, disputing with Stephen. And they were not able to
resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake. Then they suborned
men, which said, We have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses
and against God. And they stirred up the people, and the elders, and the
scribes, and came upon him, and caught him, and brought him to the
council. And set up false witnesses, which said, This man ceaseth not to
speak blasphemous words against this holy place, and the law: for we have
heard him say, that this Jesus of Nazareth shall destroy this place, and
shall change the customs which Moses delivered us.

And all that sat in the council, looking steadfastly on him, saw his face
as it had been the face of an angel.

Then said the high priest, Are these things so?

And he said, Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken: [Stephen here makes his
defense, concluding with a terrible, denunciation of the Jews as being
stiffnecked and persecutors of their prophets, and as betrayers and
murderers of Jesus Christ.]

When they heard these things, they were cut to the heart, and they,
gnashed on him with their teeth.

But he, being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into heaven,
and saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God,
and said, Behold, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing
on the right hand of God.

Then they cried out with a loud voice, and stopped their ears, and ran
upon him with one accord, and cast him out of, the city, and stoned him:
and the witnesses laid down their clothes at a young man's feet, whose
name was Saul. And they stoned Stephen, calling upon God, and saying,
Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.

And he kneeled down, and cried with a loud voice, Lord, lay not this sin
to their charge. And when he had said this, he fell asleep.

And Saul was consenting unto his death.--Acts vi, 8-15; vii, 1-2, 54-56;
viii, 1.




SAUL'S CONVERSION.


And Saul, yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the
disciples of the Lord, went unto the high priest, and desired of him
letters to Damascus to the synagogues, that if he found any of this way,
whether they were men or women, he might bring them bound unto Jerusalem.

And as he journeyed, he came near Damascus: and suddenly there shined
round about him a light from heaven: and he fell to the earth, and heard
a voice, saying unto him, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he
said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou
persecutest it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks. And he
trembling and astonished said, Lord, what wilt thou have me to do? And
the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the city, and it shall be told
thee what thou must do.

And the men which journeyed with him stood speechless, hearing a voice,
but seeing no man.

And Saul arose from the earth; and when his eyes were opened, he saw no
man: but they led him by the hand, and brought him into Damascus. And he
was three days without sight, and neither did eat nor drink.

And there was a certain disciple at Damascus, named Ananias; and to him
said the Lord in a vision, Ananias. And he said, Behold, I am here, Lord.

And the Lord said unto him, Arise, and go into the street which is called
Straight, and enquire in the house of Judas for one called Saul, of
Tarsus: for, behold, he prayeth, and hath seen in a vision a man named
Ananias coming in, and putting his hand on him, that he might receive his
sight. Then Ananias answered, Lord, I have heard by many of this man, how
much evil he hath done to thy saints at Jerusalem: and here he hath
authority from the chief priests to bind all that call on thy name. But
the Lord said unto him, Go thy way: for he is a chosen vessel unto me, to
bear my name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the children of Israel:
for I will shew him how great things he must suffer for my name's sake.

And Ananias went his way, and entered into the house; and putting his
hands on him said, Brother Saul, the Lord, even Jesus, that appeared unto
thee in the way as thou camest, hash sent me, that thou mightest receive
thy sight, and be filled with the Holy Ghost. And immediately there fell
from his eyes as it had been scales: and he received sight forthwith, and
arose and was baptized. And when he had received meat, he was
strengthened.

Then was Saul certain days with the disciples which were at Damascus. And
straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of
God.--Acts ix, 1-20.




THE DELIVERANCE OF ST. PETER.


Now about that time Herod the king stretched forth his hands to vex
certain of the church. And he killed James the brother of John with the
sword.

And because he saw it pleased the Jews, he proceeded further to take
Peter also. (Then were the days of unleavened bread.) And when he had
apprehended him, he put him in prison, and delivered him to four
quarternions of soldiers to keep him; intending after Easter to bring him
forth to the people.

Peter therefore was kept in prison: but prayer was made without ceasing
of the church unto God for him.

And when Herod would have brought him forth, the same night Peter was
sleeping between two soldiers, bound with two chains: and the keepers
before the door kept the prison. And, behold, the angel of the Lord came
upon him, and a light shined in the prison: and he smote Peter on the
side, and raised him up, saying, Arise up quickly. And his chains fell
off from his hands. And the angel said unto him, Gird thyself, and bind
on thy sandals: And so he did. And he saith unto him, Cast thy garment
about thee, and follow me. And he went out, and followed him; and wist
not that it was true which was done by the angel but thought he saw a
vision. When they were past the first and the second ward, they came unto
the iron gate that leadeth unto the city; which opened to them of his own
accord and they went out and passed on through one street and forthwith
the angel departed from him.

And when Peter was come to himself, he said, Now I know of a surety, that
the Lord hath sent his angel, and hath delivered me out of the hand of
Herod, and from all the expectation of the people of the Jews.--Acts xii,
1-11




PAUL AT EPHESUS.


And it came to pass, that, while Apollos was at Corinth, Paul having
passed through the upper coasts came to Ephesus; and finding certain
disciples, he said unto them, Have ye, received the Holy Ghost since ye
believed? And they said unto him, We have not so much as heard whether
there be any Holy Ghost. And he, said unto them, Unto what then were ye
baptized? And they said, Unto John's baptism. Then said Paul, John verily
baptized with the baptism of repentance, saying unto the people, that
they should believe on him which should come after him, that is, on
Christ Jesus.

When they heard this, they were baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
And when Paul had laid his hands upon them, the Holy Ghost came on them;
and they spake with tongues, and prophesied. And all the men were about
twelve.

And he went into the synagogue, and spake boldly for the space of three
months, disputing and persuading the things concerning the kingdom of
God.

But when divers were hardened, and believed not, but spake evil of that
way before the multitude, he departed from them, and separated the
disciples, disputing daily in the school of one Tyrannus. And this
continued by the space of two years; so that all they which dwelt in Asia
heard the word of the Lord Jesus, both Jews and Greeks.

And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: so that from his
body were brought unto the sick handkerchiefs or aprons, and the diseases
departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.

Then certain of the vagabond Jews, exorcists, took upon them to call over
them which had evil spirits the name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure
you by Jesus whom Paul preacheth. And there were seven sons of one Sceva,
a Jew, and chief of the priests, which did so. And the evil spirit
answered and said, Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are ye? And the
man in whom the evil spirit was leaped on them, and overcame them, and
prevailed against them, so that they fled out of that house naked and
wounded.

And this was known to all the Jews and Greeks also dwelling at Ephesus;
and fear fell on them all, and the name of the Lord Jesus was magnified.
And many that believed came, and confessed, and shewed their deeds. Many
of them also which used curious arts brought their books together, and
burned them before all men: and they counted the price of them, and found
it fifty thousand pieces of silver.

So mightily grew the word of God and prevailed.--Acts xix, 1--20.




PAUL MENACED BY THE JEWS.


Do therefore this that we say to thee: We have four men which have a vow
on them; them take, and purify thyself with them, and be at charges with
them, that they may shave their heads: and all may know that those
things, whereof they were informed concerning thee, are nothing; but that
thou thyself also walkest orderly, and keepest the law.

Then Paul took the men, and the next day purifying himself with them
entered into the temple, to signify the accomplishment of the days of
purification, until that an offering should be offered for every one of
them.

And when the seven days were almost ended, the Jews which were of Asia,
when they saw him in the temple, stirred up all the people, and laid
hands on him, crying out, Men of Israel, help: this is the man, that
teacheth all men every where against the people, and the law, and this
place: and further brought Greeks also into the temple, and hath polluted
this holy place. (For they had seen before with him in the city Trophimus
an Ephesian, whom they supposed that Paul had brought into the temple.)

And all the city was moved, and the people ran together: and they took
Paul, and drew him out of the temple: and forthwith the doors were shut.
And as they went about to kill him, tidings came unto the chief captain
of the band, that all Jerusalem was in an uproar: who immediately took
soldiers and centurions, and ran down unto them and when they saw the
chief captain and the soldiers, they left beating of Paul. Then the chief
captain came near, and took him, and commanded him to be bound with two
chains; and demanded who he was, and what he had done. And some cried one
thing, some another, among the multitude: and when he could not know the
certainty for the tumult, he commanded him to be carried into the castle.
And when he came upon the stairs, so it was, that he was borne of the
soldiers for the violence of the people. For the multitude of the people
followed after, crying, Away with him.

And as Paul was to be led into the castle, he said unto the chief
captain, May I speak unto thee? Who said, Canst thou speak Greek? Art not
thou that Egyptian, which before these days madest an uproar, and leddest
out into the wilderness four thousand men that were murderers? But Paul
said, I am a man which am a Jew of Tarsus, a city in Cilicia, a citizen
of no mean city: and, I beseech thee, suffer me to speak unto the people.

And when he had given him license, Paul stood on the stairs, and beckoned
with the hand unto the people. And when there was made a great silence,
he spake unto them in the Hebrew tongue.--Acts xxi, 23-40.




PAUL'S SHIPWRECK.


And while the day was coming on, Paul besought them all to take meat,
saying, This day is the fourteenth day that ye have tarried and continued
fasting, having taken nothing. Wherefore I pray you to take some meat;
for this is for your health: for there shall not a hair fall from the
head of any of you.

And when he had thus spoken, he took bread, and gave thanks to God in
presence of them all; and when he had broken it, he began to eat. Then
were they all of good cheer, and they also took some meat.

And we were in all in the ship two hundred threescore and sixteen souls.

And when they had eaten enough, they lightened the ship, and cast out the
wheat into the sea. And when it was day, they knew not the land: but they
discovered a certain creek with a shore, into the which they were minded,
if it were possible, to thrust in the ship. And when they had taken up
the anchors, they committed themselves unto the sea, and loosed the
rudder bands, and hoised up the mainsail to the wind, and made toward
shore. And falling into a place where two seas met, they ran the ship
aground; and the forepart stuck fast, and remained unmovable, but the
hinder part was broken with the violence of the waves. And the soldiers'
counsel was to kill the prisoners, lest any of them should swim out, and
escape. But the centurion, willing to save Paul, kept them from their
purpose; and commanded that they which could swim should cast themselves
first into the sea, and get to land: and the rest, some on boards, and
some on broken pieces of the ship. And so it came to pass, that they
escaped all safe to land.

And when they were escaped, then they knew that the island was called
Melita.

And the barbarous people shewed us no little kindness: for they kindled a
fire, and received us every one, because of the present rain, and because
of the cold.--Acts xxvii, 33-44; xxviii, 1-2




DEATH ON THE PALE HORSE.


And when he had opened the fourth seal, I heard the voice of the fourth
beast say, Come and see.

And I looked, and behold a pale horse: and his name that sat on him was
Death, and Hell followed with him. And power was given unto them over the
fourth part of the earth, to kill with sword, and with hunger, and with
death, and with the beasts of the earth. Revelation vi, 7-8






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Dore Gallery of Bible
Illustrations, Volume 9, by Anonymous, Illustrated by Gustave Dore

*** 